					In the Shadow of a Culture War

Elena is in bed resting. Her vocal cords are aflame.
She’s trying to recuperate from constant competitive forensics.
She’ll stay like this for two weeks.
But in a few short months this will metastasize into whole being burnout. 
A body consumed by constant competition. 

Elena has competed in competitive homeschool speech and debate for six years now. Homeschool speech and debate is an extracurricular activity for middle school and high school students. While there is quite a bit of variation between individual leagues, events almost always include some form of persuasive speech (basically an argumentative paper as a speech), interpretive events, that basically function as the creative fiction and nonfiction genres of speech events, and limited preparation events, where the competitor is given a time limit to prepare a speech based off of a prompt. 
Debate consists primarily of two events: Team Policy debate and Lincoln Douglas debate, commonly referred to as TP and LD respectively. At its most basic form, Policy debate puts two pairs of students in debate over a question of legislative policy, typically some specific federal government policy that should (or should not) be adopted.
	Lincoln Douglas debates revolve around questions of values. A classic LD resolution (the topic of the debate) is resolved: liberty is more important than security.

	There are quite a few different speech and debate leagues around the country. The most popular being NSDA (National Speech and Debate Association), founded in 1925 it is the largest and oldest speech and debate league in America. The conservative christian homeschooling community was comparatively late to the game—when what would become NCFCA, started in 1996. In 2002 the southern Christian Communicators of America (CCA) league split off from NCFCA and in 2009 the California based Stoa would break off from NCFCA and form their own league.
	Speech and Debate revolves around all consuming tournaments that demand an incredible amount of time from all involved: students, parents, community members, and tournament organizers (often parents themselves). A single round of speech or debate can last up to 90 minutes. Each speech room typically hosts eight competitors who speak anywhere from five to 10 minutes depending on the event. Most tournaments try to fit 3 debate rounds and 2 speech rounds in a single day. What does this mean in practice? The Point Loma classic, hosted at Point Loma Nazarene University, is a large tournament. In 2018 the classic consisted of at least 140 competitors. This is the schedule planned for next January:

Students will compete from 8:00AM to 8:45PM and then they’ll do it again the next day, and again the day after that. Three days. Up to 12 hours of speaking, debating, breaks, and the awards ceremony. But tournaments aren’t just all consuming events that happen two or three times a semester. For the most serious competitors, competing in 8-11 tournaments over the course of a school year is a matter of course. Typically, the majority of tournaments come between January and April. NITOC (National Invitational Tournament of Champions), Stoa’s national tournament is by itself a six day marathon.

What is that consuming force? What is that thing that drives us to go to the total brink? 
Is it the protestant work ethic? The values of the reformation giving rise to a capitalist need to constantly produce? Perhaps. But these theories, don’t analyze the specific values and beliefs of conservative christian homeschoolers enough to rigorously explain these behaviors.

Elena grew up in an Evangelical Free church. By the time she was 11 or 12 she was excited to compete in speech and debate. As the years of competing wore on, she started to notice the sexism that coats the experience of almost every single female speech and debate competitor. Every female competitor has a story of the judge who makes completely inappropriate comments about female competitors’ appearance or attire. 
	Elena sensed that the gender roles her community advocated for were not right. But she had grown to associate faith with these understandings of gender and sexuality to such a degree that to questions these assumptions felt like questioning God.

NCFCA is closely tied to the homeschool legal defense association (HSLDA), a titanic force in conservative christian homeschooling circles. They represent around 15% of all American homeschooling families—a quarter of a million students. Michael Ferris founded HSLDA in 1983 to “to defend and advance the constitutional rights of parents to direct the education of their children and to protect family freedoms.” HSLDA is committed to defending homeschooling and is unafraid to use fearful rhetoric to cement power and support not only within the conservative christian homeschooling community but throughout the broader conservative world.  This defensive posture is pervasive throughout HSLDA’s rhetoric. They send out a quarterly periodical “The Homeschool Court Report” that delivers narratives of how HSLDA protected the homeschooling rights of their member families. A quick perusal through it will reveal protective homeschooling rhetoric is at full blast throughout the periodical. In the issue, a case where the local government acted in hostile manner toward an HSLDA member family is termed “discrimination”. One of the primary articles in the periodical, written by HSLDA co-founder Michael Smith equates the fight for homeschooling rights with the civil rights movement: “Opponents of homeschooling were extremely powerful, highly entrenched, and largely motivated by prejudice and myths—much like opponents of the civil rights movement.” The audacity is astounding. Nothing, in American history is comparable to the civil rights movement. Comparing educational choice to racial discrimination is almost always going to look like naive. A rhetorical move designed to co-op the political support of the civil rights movement with HSLDA’s own agenda. A self-serving proposition that holds the key to understanding the extreme behaviors of families and competitors at the top of the speech and debate world.
Michael Farris, the other co-founder of HSLDA became the president of the premier religious right legal institution, the Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) in 2017. They have overseen numerous landmark Supreme Court decisions over the years. Perhaps most recognizably, Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. the case that struck down Obamacare’s contraceptive mandate for closely held for-profit corporations. Under Farris, the most high-profile case they have brought to the Supreme Court is Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission. In which the state of Colorado punished a bakery for refusing to serve a wedding cake to a lesbian couple.
The people associated with ADF are a Who’s who of the conservative christian world. Amy Coney Barrett, the Trump appointed seventh circuit court of appeals judge, taught some classes for them back in the day. The Devos family is a big backer of ADF. David French, the prominent Never Trumper, was once senior counsel for ADF. James Dobson, the focus on the family founder, was involved in starting it and so was Bill Bright, founder of Campus Crusade for Christ and author of the well known evangelical booklet The Four Spiritual Laws.
	That means that NCFCA is just two hops away (and Stoa three hops) from the most powerful conservative christian culture-war litigators in America. With the added context of the mission and purposes of HSLDA and ADF, what’s implicit in the mission statements of both Stoa and NCFCA become a little more clear. Stoa’s mission statement is: “Speaking Boldly. Changing the World for Christ”. And NCFCA’s say their “ultimate goal” is to “not…merely offer academic sport, but to intentionally train effective witnesses for Christ.” The implicit logic is that by training conservative homeschool students to speak effectively, conservative christians can win the culture war. And make no mistake NCFCA is explicitly conservative. They affirm The Nashville Statement, the latest major anti-LGBT statement out of the conservative evangelical world.Stoa explicitly invokes the “founding fathers” to justify their organizational structure. Both believe scripture is inerrant. 

“WE DENY that adopting a homosexual or transgender self-conception is consistent with God’s holy purposes in creation and redemption.” - Article 7, The Nashville Statement
Not only does the Nashville statement define the act of homosexuality as a sin, it seeks to erase the very idea of queerness from righteousness. For NCFCA, affirming the Nashville statement makes the closet the only option for LGBT students. For stoa it is functionally the same.

In the fall of my third year of speech and debate, Brandon, a popular speech kid who had graduated a few years ago, admitted to having same sex desires. 
At that point he wasn’t even ready to use gay to describe himself. 
That night, when the news traveled around the club, there was a large group of girls circled up consoling Brandon’s closest friend Sara. Sara had long believed that she was going to marry him. 
There were a lot of tears.
I remember one girl advocated for a loving response to Brandon.
I would later learn that Sara had spent at least a week refusing to eat, barely moving from bed.
I hate the closet.

What makes inerrancy compelling is that it touts the all-sufficiency of the Bible—It is completely and totally accurate. It’s accurate historically and theologically. That implies that the Bible contains no contradictions and is completely self-interpreting. That is the Bible is the sole tool for building a way to interpret the Bible. In some of the most conservative sectors of homeschool speech and debate, this leads to a skepticism towards all forms of knowledge that do not come from the Bible.
	This means that anything from patriarchy, to mental illness, to issues of race and sexuality were rarely addressed using tools outside of the Bible. To do so would be by definition unbiblical. These ideas are rarely voiced, but they form the backbone that makes it difficult to approach these issues within these communities.

When Elena was a senior in high school she ran two pieces. One was a persuasive piece advocating for a more loving approach to the LGBT community.
The second was a DI (dramatic interpretation) that adapted the Laramie Project for the conventions of speech. The Laramie Project is about the murder of Matthew Shepherd a gay student at the University of Wyoming and the subsequent aftermath.

Elena’s DI took first place at NITOC that year.

For parents the combination of developing articulate, powerful witnesses for not only Christ (and the status associated with having children but who also advocate for conservative Christianity) but the conservative movement and the fear of a skeptical public waiting to force their children to go to public school, creates a swirling vortex of energy and passion that allows for the willing consumption of the life of the family into speech and debate.

I fell in love with speech and debate because it told me that my ideas and personality—particularly my budding obsession with Apple, and the broader techno-business world—was worth developing. That my hunger for knowledge was cool and interesting. These voices came from people with positions that demanded my respect: experienced competitors and coaches. When I joined Stoa, most of my fellow competitors were at least two if not five years older than I was. And the there were the multitude of parent-coaches who believed deeply in Stoa’s brand of speech and debate and were eager to invest their time in my development.
While some of this had to do with the particularly wonderful people who introduced me to speech and debate, their behavior was characteristic of homeschool speech and debate.
For most students, the main draw is certainly not culture war. For most, I suspect the motivation is something similar to mine. At first. But the comes the glory and the status of winning. Winning is intoxicating. Not only do you have the respect of your peers, but also the respect of your friends’ parents too. Top competitors names became leaders in the community with a voice that was not only respected but analyzed and discussed. I remember my Dad telling me how one Dad he talked to didn’t buy the “Jonah hype”. The fact that competitors get hype at all speaks volumes. 
	On top of that, vacuuming up the vast amounts of information necessary to compete is something that the best speech and debaters almost universally enjoy. The intellectual thrill of learning new information is not a small component of the drive to compete. But this mismatch between the values of speech and debate for parents and the values for competitors can result in a functional dishonesty that drives people apart. 

At some tournaments some men tried to dress code adult women who were volunteering for the tournament.

However one thing that’s critical to keep in mind is that even while the leaders of homeschooling advocate for conservative strains of Christianity because the functional units of stoa (and to a large extent NCFCA) are family run clubs, the culture war aspirations of the central leadership of stoa and NCFCA were not always embraced or believed by these families and clubs. In some ways this made it more difficult because there are healthy families and healthy clubs involved in speech and debate (hopefully you could so that for the majority of families and clubs).

At the same time this approach to the Bible and to community is impossible. The Bible isn’t black and white, issues of race and sexuality are constantly coming up throughout the Bible and they must be interpreted. Inerrantist like to pretend like there is only one interpretation (theirs).
On top of that competitors were expected to perform in-depth heavy duty research 24/7. Conflicting view points were put to the test, through the process of debate, to find the truth was the entire point of debate and in some ways all speech categories as well.
Personal experience became impossible to replicate for Elena. Reading the Bible, especially passages that conservatives used to enforce sexists practices, became painful to read. When she started to attend college at the conservative (but significantly more open) Biola, her church attendance disintegrated into ash.			

CHEA a California centric homeschooling convention once invited Voddie Baucham, a semi-prominent pastor and apologist to speak at their annual convention. It was the summer after Elena’s freshman year. Baucham said said something to the extent of America started to go down hill when women left the kitchen and got the right to vote. The crowd cheered. Elena got up and left.

Elena found faith again at an anglican church her sophomore year. Her theology is entirely anglican—little remains of her evangelical roots. She emphasizes the careful practices that Anglicans take to read scripture: there is a daily office that will guide you through scripture, hymns and prayer for the day. Every Sunday has three scripture readings, one from the Old Testament, one from the New Testament, and one from the Gospels. Elena practices a more active spirituality, she practices contemplative prayer (like Lectio Divina) and she believes in a mystical presence during Eucharist. (As opposed to the disenchanted remembrance language used in her evangelical church)
The point is simple internal feelings conjugation of belief has been replaced by active practices that encounter God. 

In multiple blog posts discussing the homeschool speech and debate adjacent org, Institute for Cultural Communicators, interns discussed a culture of perfection that did tremendous damage and made no attempt to fix it. When you place these expectations on teenagers, the likelihood is that something is bound to go wrong. 

“One of my teammates had gained a slight amount of weight (she was still incredibly tiny) that caused a very minor panty line to be visible in her evening gown. Mrs. Moon pulled her to the side when she stepped backstage in the middle of a performance, and made her take off her underwear. In addition to humiliating events like that, Mrs. Moon’s talk caused a general panic amongst many of the girls, which shouldn’t be a big surprise since Teresa gave this talk to a group of girls, knowing full well that at least 3 of them had struggled with eating disorders and body dysmorphia. Tying weight gain to modesty and morality only made many of these girl’s weight struggles worse.”
Marla Blum 2008 CFC (now ICC) intern.

Crisis can be a catalyst for growth. Evangelical colleges know this and embrace it, they don’t try to fight the crisis of faith that is so commonly stereotyped as kids going to college and losing their faith. Instead, they try and provide the resources necessary to figure out a more complete faith. Speech and debate, and homeschool culture in general ,has the all of the answers figured out and students are rewarded (especially in apologetics and debate) for having all of the answers. It’s a posture of war. And war leaves no space for questions or crisis. Sometimes holding onto your values tightly just ends up destroying community, protecting abusers, and victimizing the vulnerable. 
