Ezekiel Pierson

I am sitting on the ground.
I am free of anxiety and happy.
It is no surprise that I am reading.
I am nine or ten years old and I had found this book, The Girl Who Could Fly, at the Fletcher Hills county library.
I have just checked it out of the library with my own library card. 
The first time Piper jumped off of her house, plummeted towards the earth, and abruptly leveled out my heart had leaped.
In case you didn’t already know, I am enjoying this book. 
I hadn’t questioned the woman in a suit, who for some unfathomable reason seemed to be like me, when she abruptly showed up to take Piper to a special school. “The protagonist is always leaving home” I thought so it made perfect sense to me that Piper would too. Piper had just met an array of kids at the school, all with some power of their own. One of those was Bella.

As I read, Bella dances in my mind’s eye setting off rainbow after rainbow of pure beauty. But tears are streaming down her face. She will not be able to use her powers ever again.

My heart twists in confused grief. I get up. I don’t want to continue reading, but I am drawn along like a powerful magnet.

Things get worse. Still agitated, I move the book to the filing cabinet.
Now I am standing as I read, literally pouring over the book.

I see Piper struggling to fly through a suddenly cramped and oppressive hallway.

My pride at finding a book I loved quickly turning to horror, I rip myself away from the book, and start to walk aimlessly throughout my house.
I’m stressed.
The pacing does nothing—I am still bound to the The Girl Who Could Fly. I return to the cheap wooden filing cabinet where I had just set the book down. 
With my body protesting sharply I continue to read.
The school administrators are well and truly *evil* I feel more than I consciously think.
How could they gather children only to destroy who they are?
My fascination and tolerance for the book finally breaks. 
I don’t know how to approach the extreme emotion of that moment. So I bottled it up. Like a lode of gold jaggedly delves into the core of the earth, my tumultuous experience shot through my heart.

Until I read The Girl Who Could Fly I had never dropped a book in the middle of reading it.
For many years, I work hard to ignore this experience. 
My brain quietly set up a no fly zone and quarantined this story off from everyone, but most importantly from myself. 

Why? Why has this story stuck with me?
Well this story marks my first introduction to evil.
Not the clear evil of my earlier childhood favorites: Lewis, Tolkien, or L’Engle. But an evil that is deceitful and ambiguous, an evil that talks in a dialect I know. Piper’s parents are simple folk who have some sort of good ole’ American country faith. That faith doesn’t sound too different from my suburban Christian faith. Oh and Piper is homeschooled too. So when the narrator informs us that Piper is extremely lonely my heart grates against the stereotypical implication. “I am not lonely” I tell myself.
I don’t know how to respond to that except to hurt. 

Up to this point in my reading life I had never been so deceived by a book. Honestly, the deception was not really a fault of the book—the author worked hard to plant the seeds to make it obvious who the heroes and who the villains are. But to me the adults—especially Piper’s parents but also the school leaders—were all people who should be trusted. And why not? They talked like I expected adults to talk. 
Why would adults act against children in the first place?

Several years after I first read the book—It must’ve been at least two years but it felt like five—I walk back into my fletcher hills library and wander over to the children’s section. Why I’m not quite sure, at this point I am reading more from the YA and Sci-Fi/Epic Fantasy shelves at the other end of the library. Standing all alone in the middle of a bookshelf was The Girl Who Could Fly. 
The no fly zone was readying its anti-aircraft weapons, but I still found myself lifting it off of its book rack—skipping over the words that had caused such agony to find the epilogue.
Piper and the rest of the gang are happy and thriving with their powers fully accepted in their respective communities. 
But Bella was nowhere to be seen.
Years later I would conclude Bella was gay.
A few years after that I started to suspect this story was really about conversion therapy.

